Development of a convolution neural network for the classification of Alzheimer’s Dementia.

Abstract:
Alzheimer’s and Dementia patients are increasing each year due to increased average age of living.
To help a greater amount of patients be diagnosed, a new neural network model will be created to classify stages of the Alzheimer’s Dementia.
Leading to earlier treatment and management of the diseases.
This study proposes the creation of a new neural network to be used for the classification of Alzheimer’s Dementia. 
The research creates a convolutional neural network for image classification using an Alzheimer’s data set containing pre-processed X-ray images.
The research provides documentation for the design, implementation and evaluation for the creation of a neural network using pyTorch version 1.9.0. 
A study of the neural network model ”StackNet” presents a validation accuracy of 0.65 when classifying Alzheimer’s Dementia.
Presenting an increased value of validation accuracy when compared to other models currently trained for image classification such as the base DenseNet model.
Through research of literature there is a lack of research when using X-ray data-sets, thus this model currently trained using X-ray imaging as a method of classifying Alzheimer’s disease.

Keywords: Convolutional neural network, Deep learning, Neuroimaging, X-ray imaging, Modularity, Machine learning

1.1 Introduction

A core saying within the medical field is ”Prevention is better than cure”. Where this
project does not aim to prevent Alzheimer’s Dementia from occurring. To adhere to
this statement and attempt to create a better life for those suffering from medical
conditions, this study will be focused on the early detection of Alzheimer’s Dementia disease. The study will create a new system which uses deep learning to identify
and classify medical images (1) for the purpose of identifying possible cases of Dementia and Alzheimer’s earlier than current methods (2). Allowing the patients to
get faster treatment and management of the condition to improve their quality of
life. The project will aim towards the creation of a new neural network which will
classify images of Alzheimer’s which can be used as a form of early detection in aid
of what currently exists. Through the use of a literature review, project time plan,
design, implementation and evaluation of the project.
This article is broken down into three sections. A summarised literature review will
be conducted to prepare for the project and understand concepts and techniques to
be used within the product development. Using studies such as (3) and (4) to understand more about current methods of classification and applications of deep learning
when using biological data. Following this will be a design of the proposed system.
This will lead onto the implementation of the general user interface (GUI), architecture of the neural network and changes required. The report will conclude with an
evaluation of the results and a discussion presented of the findings. This will then
entail further study that can be followed on from the completion of this study.

1.2 Related Literature

This paper will review the literature and research specifically into Alzheimer’s and
Dementia mental health diseases alongside AI developments which aid the prognosis of these diseases.
Introduction to Dementia
Dementia is classified as a syndrome typically caused by a decline of brain functions
(5). Research shows ”One in fourteen over the age of 65 have dementia”(5), with
this number increasing due to the average age of living increasing. Many symptoms
of this disease are visible due to the brains loss of functionality, therefore typically
patients with this condition will have memory loss and reduced motor skills in all aspects of their body known as neuro-psychiatric symptoms (6) e.g. Speech, all forms
of movement, judgement skills and mental understanding.
In conjunction with brain scans such as tomographic scans (CT)(7) and magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI)(8) it is possible to quantify the severity of a case of dementia. Using these techniques it is also possible to gather an understanding of the
rate of progression the disease has on the patient. By training an AI to notice these
1 Creation of StackNet model for classification of Alzheimer’s Disease 3
patterns and stages of the disease it is possible to identify possible cases of dementia
at an earlier stage.

Introduction to Alzheimer’s

Alzheimer’s is a physical disease that affects the brain and is the most common
cause of dementia (9). Alzheimer’s will cause a build up of proteins which causes
the build up of harmful structures called plaques and tangles (9). These structures
cause damage to nerve cells and brain tissue.

Brain Scan Techniques

Different types of scans can be used to analyse the severity of neurodegenerative
disease within the patient. These scans can focus on different tissues and cell types
within the body to offer a different viewpoint on the progression of the disease.
Scans using positron emission tomography (PET) can be used to identify stages
of the disease in patients presenting mild cognitive impairment (MCI) (10). PET
uses in vivo amyloid imaging agents to highlight areas of the brain by quantifying
the amount of amyloid-B protein (11).
Fluorodeoxyglucose(FDG)-PET (FDG-PET) scans are used to monitor changes
within glucose metabolism and blood flow within the brain (12).
Structural MRI monitors tissue changes by looking at the grey and white matter.
This scan can help the early diagnosis of potential symptoms of Alzheimer’s by
seeing which area of the brain is being affected by tissue atrophy. This can also help
slow the disease by targeting drugs for specific area’s or functions of the brain (13).
Diffusion tensor imaging is used to assess micro-structural brain changes by
looking at the white matter fibre tracts (14). This can be used to gather a fractional
anisotropy (FA) value (15) which will aid in prognosis of brain functionality.
Functional MRI (fMRI) (16) uses the blood-oxygen-level-dependant signal to
measure blood oxygenation levels and blood flow. This can be used to assess
changes in neural activity and changes in task related neural activity (17).
Research shows that multiple types of scans within conjunction of each other can
lead to a greater understanding of the progression of the disease, this is known as
multi-modal imaging. Allowing for cellular events to be monitored simultaneously
(18). By keeping records of different activities within the brain, as well as recording
any abnormalities at that particular stage of the disease, a greater understanding will
be developed of changes which occur to progress Alzheimer’s into a more severe
stage of the disease.

Introduction to Image Classification

Image classification in deep learning is a supervised learning problem. By defining
a set of classes which are the objects to identify within the image, this is then used to
train a model to recognise them using labelled example photos (1).Brain scans from
different stages of Dementia and Alzheimer’s in the learning stage of image classi-
4 William Peck, Mufti Mahmud
fication which would then be arranged into individual classes. This would then set
an example for a new image to be inputted and placed into one of those set classes.
The precision and accuracy of this would depend on the quantity of brain scans
available for study. (19) states how problems with current models can occur as poor
estimates of classifier parameters (due to number of training samples) can result in
low labelling accuracy and incorrect generalisation properties. Within image classification there are three types, these are supervised learning, unsupervised learning
and object-based image analysis (OBIA) (20).
1. Unsupervised learning entails different techniques which are used to generate
clusters from the image are K-means clustering (21), ISODATA clustering (22)
and expectation-maximisation (23). The core feature of unsupervised learning is
that there is no requirement for samples.
2. OBIA takes pixels from the data and arranges them into groups of objects, these
can be based on spectral similarity or other external variables (24). There are
two core segmentation algorithms developed for this being, eCognition (25) and
ArcGIS (26).
3. supervised learning uses different methods such as maximum-likelihood (Bayesian
Classifier) (27). This technique uses data samples to create a training site, this
data is labelled for training purposes. New data is then classified compared to the
training samples to be given a weight from 0-1, this uses the process of probability distribution (28) to assess the weight assigned. Supervised learning can also
be incorporated into other techniques to create a variant of supervised learning
such as semi-supervised learning (29).
Neural Network Types
Convolution neural network (CNN): This is a deep learning method or algorithm
which takes in an input (typically an image) and assigns to it various weights and
bias to features within the image (30). These feature are able to be differentiated
from each other. Compared to other classification algorithms pre-processing is required less withing a convolution network. Within a convolution layer not all nodes
are connected to each other, each node only relates to the neighbouring nodes. They
also get smaller as passed on through the network due to shrinking from dividing
from the input factor. Pooling layers are used to filter out details, this is done by
down sampling a feature map, completed by summarising the features in areas of
the feature map (31).
Artificial neural network (ANN): ANN’s are a deep learning algorithm which are
able to learn non linear functions, also known as universal function approximators
(UFA) (32). Similar to a CNN they have the capability to learn weights that map
the input to an output. A core feature of the ANN is the activation function. This is
introduces non linear properties into the network, helping it learn complex relationships between input and output.
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN): The RNN is very similar to an ANN, however
on its hidden layers it has a looping constraint to ensure sequential information is
captured in the input data. RNN’s primary method is parameter sharing, this shares
1 Creation of StackNet model for classification of Alzheimer’s Disease 5
the parameters across different time steps of the network. This method reduces the
over all required parameters needed to train the network, decreasing the computation
cost of training.
